---
id: approach
title: Approach to addressing Data Quality and Quality Assurance Processes
author: Peter Brenton
author_title: Atlas of Living Australia
author_url: https://github.com/pbrenton
author_image_url: https://avatars1.githubusercontent.com/u/8119351?s=460&u=0c79064c6a42ce83f46c5225fd5bc070e1ee900d&v=4
tags: [approach, philosophy]
---

The citizen science domain is often criticized for generating data which has limited scientific value. In some cases such criticism may be fair, but in many cases the citizen science domain is unfairly attributed with producing "poor quality" data without data consumers properly considering factors such as "<strong>fitness for use</strong>".

In general, data users are interested in the following questions when considering trust in data for fitness for use:

<ul>
    <li>Where has the data come from?</li>
    <li>Who collected it?</li>
    <li>Is the accuracy and precision of the data adequate for my intended use?</li>
    <li>Were the collection, treatment methods and equipment suitable for my intended use?</li>
    <li>Is the data comprehensive & complete?</li>
    <li>Were the collection and treatment methods applied consistency for the whole dataset?</li>
    <li>What quality assurance, curation, validation & management processes have been applied to the data?</li>
    <li>What are the known and implied biases in the data?</li>
    <li>What conditions apply to using the data?</li>
    <li>How should the dataset be cited or referenced?</li>
    <li>How can the data be accessed and in what format(s) is it available?</li>
    <li>Is a data management plan available for the data?</li>
</ul>

The PPSR Core project is attempting to address many of the causal factors and underlying issues in respect to data and metadata associated trust in citizen science data. Whilst many of these issues are not unique to citizen science, the citizen science domain is frequently criticised for failing to meet expectations in these areas.

## Data Quality and Fitness for Use - some general principles

<ul>
    <li>All datasets have limitations.</li>
    <li>Data quality is largely a relative concept that relates to “fitness for the intended purpose”.</li>
    <li>Fitness for use should be assessed from the integrity of the data rather than from type of source, personalities or reputations.</li>
    <li>Metadata that describes the processes and protocols by which the data was created and treated are critical pieces of information to assist data consumers in making informed choices about fitness for use.</li>
    <li>Accuracy & precision are important for data interpretation and analysis.</li>
    <li>The more accurate a record is, the higher it’s “quality”, as it has more potential for re-use across a wider range of situations.</li>
    <li>Data precision can be reduced for a particular use, but it cannot be enhanced. Therefore the more precice one can be at the point of making a record, the more utility the record has.</li>
    <li>Lack of trust and provenance prejudice often lie at the heart of the criticisms being levelled at citizen science in respect to perceptions of poor quality data.</li>
    <li>Software design is an important factor in improving DQ/QA processes and outcomes, but it is only part of the solution. Project and data owners also need to take responsibility for these and employ a range of off-system solutions.</li>
</ul>

## Factors Affecting Trust in Citizen Science Data

<h2>References</h2>
<p>The following references were used to inform the above content:</p>
<p>A. Alabri and J. Hunter, "Enhancing the Quality and Trust of Citizen Science Data," 2010 IEEE Sixth International Conference on e-Science, Brisbane, QLD, 2010, pp. 81-88, doi: 10.1109/eScience.2010.33.</p>
<p>Chapman, Arthur. (2005). Principles of Data Quality. version 1.0 Report for the Global Biodiversity Information Facility, Copenhagen.</p>
<p>Eréndira Aceves‐Bueno  Adeyemi S. Adeleye  Marina Feraud  Yuxiong Huang  Mengya Tao  Yi Yang  Sarah E. Anderson, "The Accuracy of Citizen Science Data: A Quantitative Review". The Bulletin of the Ecological Society of America. First published:29 September 2017 https://doi.org/10.1002/bes2.1336</p>
<p>J. Hunter, A. Alabri and C. van Ingen, "Assessing the quality and trustworthiness of citizen science data", Special Issue Paper, Wiley Online Library, First published:13 September 2012 https://doi.org/10.1002/cpe.2923</p>
<p></p>
